CASE NARRATIVE

On 14 May 1993 in the Four Corners area of New Mexico, a young
former track star collapsed on the way to his fiancée’s funeral and was
rushed to the Gallup Medical Center emergency room. He died a few hours
later. State medical investigators performed autopsies on both the man and
his fiancée, who had died five days earlier. They noted similarities in their
cases: flu-like symptoms of fever, coughing, and chills, with quick
progression to acute respiratory distress and death as their lungs filled with
fluid. Their infant daughter also exhibited the same symptoms but was not
as severely affected.1 None of the medical personnel involved in treating
the patients were believed to have become infected.
Three days later, Gallup Medical Center officials linked the deaths of
the young couple to three other respiratory fatalities in the region and sent a
warning to the New Mexico Department of Health. Doctors were concerned
that they were dealing with a particularly potent flu virus that could spread
quickly across the broader population. The next day the Department of
Health contacted the federal Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in Atlanta,
Georgia, and asked it to investigate.2
By 31 May 1993, the disease had claimed ten victims, eight of them
Navajos. Young, healthy adults were dying of an infectious disease that
appeared to have a surprisingly high case-fatality rate.3 An epidemiologist
from the New Mexico Department of Health reported that all died shortly
after developing symptoms similar to the flu, including a cough that quickly
progressed to a severe respiratory ailment. The official said that the
department did not know what the illness was or how to prevent it; initial
laboratory polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests for common viral and
bacterial agents had come back negative.4
Medical officials realized they were facing a major challenge: people
were dying, and no one knew why. Were all these deaths related? If so,
what common symptoms could be identified? Doctors were concerned that
if they could not determine the underlying cause of death, they could not
treat those who were becoming ill and they could not prevent even more
people from dying.

1: The Four Corners Region

Four Corners (see Map 9.1) is a region of the United States that
encompasses southwest Colorado, northwest New Mexico, northeast
Arizona, and southeast Utah. The name comes from a monument that marks
the only spot in the United States where the boundaries of four states
intersect. The monument also denotes the boundary between two semi-
autonomous Native American governments, the Navajo Nation, which
maintains the monument as a tourist attraction, and the Ute Mountain Ute
Indian Reservation.5
Many residents of the Four Corners region depend on tourism and
agriculture for their livelihoods. The area hosts thousands of visitors yearly
who come to the region to visit Canyon de Chelly National Monument and
Mesa Verde National Park, which contain ruins of early indigenous tribes,
and Monument Valley, which is notable for its large sandstone buttes. Other
residents earn their livelihoods from livestock farming, seasonal migratory
agricultural work, and employment off the Navajo reservation.6
The Four Corners Region is a high plateau: weather systems stabilize
here and then head eastward to create snow and rain in the central portion
of the United States. The area itself has low humidity, sparse precipitation,
and lots of sun. The winters are mild during the day, with temperatures
falling to or below freezing at nightfall. When El Niño occurs, usually
every three to seven years, the winters and early springs tend to be wetter
than usual. Stronger than usual El Niños bring significantly more rainy days
and more rain per day. Summers are hot. Forty percent of the region’s
precipitation comes from late-afternoon summer thunderstorms. Water
rights and access to water are important issues in the area.7
The Navajo Nation constitutes the bulk of the population in the Four
Corners region. The Nation’s reservation encompasses more than twenty-
seven-thousand square miles, with three satellite locations in central New
Mexico. The Navajo are inheritors of a cultural legacy centered on oral
traditions and customs passed down for hundreds of years. The tribe’s
spiritual beliefs, collectively known as the Navajo Way, emphasize the
importance of preserving and restoring balance and harmony with nature.
According to cultural specialists at the Navajo Nation Museum in Window
Rock, Arizona, sacred ceremonies performed by tribal healers are essential
in perpetuating the Navajo Way. The Navajo medicine people (hataa’lii in
the Navajo language) serve not only as healers but as historians with
extensive knowledge of tribal traditions and mythology.8
The Navajo Area Indian Health Service (NAIHS), a subagency of the
Department of Health and Human Services, is responsible for health care
for American Indians in the Four Corners area; its primary patients are
members of the Navajo Nation and the Southern Band of San Juan Paiutes,
but NAIHS also provides care to other Native Americans. All NAIHS
physicians must be board eligible or, preferably, board certified in a Western
medical specialty. The NAIHS sensitizes its medical professionals to the
intertwining of Navajo religion with the concepts of being, health, disease,
and the environment. The Navajo Nation Council’s Division of Health
Improvement Services—later renamed the Navajo Division of Health—also
plays a role in promoting and maintaining the overall health and well-being
of the Navajo population. It employs hundreds of health professionals,
paraprofessionals, and technical professionals scattered throughout the
Navajo Nation.9

2: Fear Takes Over

By the end of May, at least twenty-three patients—predominantly Navajos
—with symptoms of the illness were being treated at hospitals in the Four
Corners area and Albuquerque, New Mexico. Communicable disease
specialists from the Indian Health Service in Albuquerque said that they had
not yet been able to determine why people who were closely related to each
other (family cluster cases) developed adult respiratory distress syndrome in
roughly the same time period. In all cases, the disease—which some labeled
the “Navajo flu”—progressed quickly, though it did not always lead to
death. Press reports stated that four people appeared to have recovered, but
doctors said they did not know whether treatment, primarily with
antibiotics, was responsible.10
As news of the illness spread across the country, tourism to the Four
Corners area declined. Twenty-seven young Navajos who corresponded
with students at a private school in the Los Angeles area were discouraged
from visiting their pen pals. Special telephone lines set up by the New
Mexico Department of Health to handle inquiries about the illness were
overwhelmed with calls. Hospitals in Santa Fe began seeing panicky
patients who had visited the Navajo reservation within the past several
weeks. Following the discovery of “new” and “unknown” diseases, it is
typical behavior for a sensitized population within the presumably affected
community to respond by inundating the available medical infrastructure.11
In Atlanta, three young investigators in the Centers for Disease
Control’s Epidemic Intelligence Service (EIS) were called on a Friday
afternoon in late May and told to come to the office.12 They were handed
airline tickets and gas masks, the latter suggesting the possibility that they
could be exposed to a toxic substance. The EIS, the “special pathogens”
branch of the CDC, is primarily deployed when a new pathogen is
discovered or if there is an allegation or suspicion of bioterrorism. The
service was created in 1951 during the Korean War, when the United States
became worried about biological warfare. A preliminary survey of the
Internet, however, revealed no postings containing extreme anti-Navajo
rhetoric or any suggestions that terrorists might be targeting the Four
Corners area.
The connection with bioterrorism was not farfetched in the case of the
“Navajo flu.” Some residents of the reservation speculated that victims had
been exposed to a toxin stored at Fort Wingate Army Depot, a munitions
storage and demolition facility close to both the Navajo Nation and the Zuni
Pueblo Tribe. Others asked whether there were any reports of toxic spills on
or near Navajo Nation lands.13

3: Collecting the Pieces of the Puzzle

The EIS epidemiologists were skeptical that they were dealing with a flu
virus. They were working against the clock to determine not only the type
of illness but its root cause. EIS personnel began working with a small
group of investigators assembled from the state health departments, the
University of New Mexico School of Medicine, and the Navajo Area Indian
Health Service. They began combing through patient logs made available
by area hospitals and clinics.
Their research revealed that most patients lived in the Four Corners
area, but the available data did not show the victims all visiting the same
location or any obvious patterns. Most patients reported influenza-like
symptoms of abrupt fever, nausea, vomiting, headache, malaise, and body
aches—particularly abdominal and back pain. This was often followed by a
cough, gastrointestinal manifestations, and labored breathing for four or
more days before hospitalization with pulmonary edema or fluid in the
lungs, along with severe hypertension and oxygen deficit in body tissues.
Blood tests, when conducted, also showed abnormally low blood platelet
counts, which are often associated with diseases such as rickets, the plague,
rabbit fever, and deer fly fever.
14 Initially, moderate cases of the illness
were diagnosed as acute respiratory distress syndrome, juvenile diabetes,
and even gastroenteritis. Those treating the patients did not seem to be
contracting the illness.15
The investigators cast a wide investigatory net. Many of the pieces or
clues were consistent with exposure to toxic material—either accidental or
on purpose: presence of an unexplained disease in a discrete population,
many cases of death from an unexplained disease, a disease that is unusual
for an age group, a disease that is much more severe than expected, the
failure to respond to standard therapy, and the presence of munitions or
advanced weapons delivery systems.16 A few patients reported dizziness,
confusion, or impaired concentration, all of which are symptoms of
exposure to toxic material. If a biological agent were being used
deliberately to cause the deaths, one sign would be a high number of recent,
unexplained animal deaths or crop failures, but research did not turn up any
such evidence.
EIS personnel also sought out Navajo tribal healers, who were the
closest thing to a historical medical registry available. The healers told EIS
personnel that the cause of the disease was disharmony in the Navajo world.
They recounted that many people had died of sudden, powerful diseases
two other times during the twentieth century, in 1918 and 1933. Tribal
elders recalled that there were particularly abundant piñon, or pine nut,
crops those years because of unusually wet winters and springs. According
to tribal lore, rodent populations were also very high during those times.17
Rodents are well known as potential carriers of disease. Investigators
asked: Was the outbreak of a similar virus and the increase in rodent
populations on two other occasions earlier in the century a coincidence, or
did the correlation suggest the source of the disease? Investigators needed
to know as soon as possible what kinds of illnesses rodents are known to
spread and whether such illnesses were endemic to the Four Corners region.
Preliminary research suggested some answers, as shown in Table 9.1.
The investigators reached out to climatologists as well. The
climatologists confirmed that precipitation levels had increased dramatically
in 1992 and 1993 in association with El Niño. The rainfall resulted in an
abundance of vegetation and ample food supplies for rodent populations.
When precipitation levels returned to normal, however, rodent populations
became stressed due to the lack of food supply, forcing them to seek new
sources of food. The National Science Foundation and the US Fish and
Wildlife Service recommended that medical investigators consult scientists
associated with the Sevilleta Long-Term Ecological Research Program at
the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge in central New Mexico. Ecological
researchers provided a detailed analysis of twenty-two rodent species in the
area. In reviewing the reports, the investigators were struck by the fact that
there had been a tenfold increase in the rodent population between 1992 and
1993.18
People were getting sick, and many were dying, as investigators
continued to collect the various pieces of the puzzle. Doctors felt a growing
sense of urgency to discover the underlying cause of death. Public concern
was mounting, and people deserved an explanation. More important, the
public was demanding guidance on what to do to avoid getting sick, and
public health officials didn’t know what to say.